When you come back as a member of the leadership group, you worked for Sears and remained in the Air Force Reserve.
When my orders for the Korean conflict were canceled, then I had an obligation to serve in the Reserve and also to serve two years active duty.
So I went to work for Sears.
in the summer of 53, worked through Christmas, and then I was called active duty in March of 54.
And so I went on a military leave of absence from Sears so that my time with Sears kept ticking while I was gone.
So that built up some seniority for me while I was actually away on active duty.
I was only on active duty for two years.
And then when I came back to Sears,
I worked there several years and then came to Bryan when this store was fairly new at Townshire as what we call an area manager.
I had several departments under my jurisdiction at that time, what we call hard lines departments.
And then I left Sears to go into business for myself with a Whites Auto store in Caldwell, Texas.
which was a mistake.
But in retrospect, it may not have been because had I not left Sears to go to put in my own business, I probably would have stayed with Sears, which may or may not have been a good move.
You know, we'll never know.
But the business in Caldwell was not successful, so I had to get a job somewhere.
Well, I was in a reserve unit in College Station out at Easterwood Airport, and a friend of mine, Calvin Reese, was a tactical officer
in a cadet corps working for Colonel Joe Davis, the commandant at the time.
And he said, you know, I heard Colonel Davis said that he's going to need to hire a tactical officer.
And he said, would you be interested?
Well, at that time, we were selling Coke bottles, empty bottles to buy groceries just about.
I said, would I, boy, you know.
So I went in and interviewed, got the job, and started to work.
And that's when?
I started to work in January of 61 at A&M.
Do you remember that time?
I don't remember that thing.
As it worked out, that was a nine-month job as a tactical officer.
And that's when the summer between my, I had some time off between the time school ended and started, but summer school was in progress.
So I started to work on my master's degree during the summer months.
And at that time, we were allowed, as long as it didn't interfere with our work, we were allowed to take one course a day, one course a semester while we were fully employed.
So through that program and I went two summers, I was a tactical officer for two years, two summers, and then I finished my master's degree in organization and management at that time.
And then after that two years, there was an organization on the campus headed up by Jim Bradley,
called Industrial Economics Research Division, which was a part of TEAS at that time.
So I went to work for Jim doing market research work for two years, and we had a personnel director named Clark Monroe.
And I call you Clark about half the time, and I call him Haskell when I see him.
But anyway, I don't know how he spells his last name.
Maybe not the same as your... Is it a little bit differently there?
But Clark had remembered...
For some reason, when he saw my resume when I was moving from a tactical officer job to industrial economics research, he had remembered that I'd had eight years with Sierra Roebuck.
Well, the manager of the old exchange store, Carl Birdwell, he has a son named Dickie Birdwell that lives here in town now.
He used to be on College Station City Council.
But his father was Doc Birdwell, Carl Birdwell, they called him Doc.
was the manager of the old exchange store, and he was about to retire.
So they were looking for a replacement for Doc.
And Clark had remembered that I had eight years' experience with Sears.
He called me up and asked me if I'd be interested in a job.
Well, it paid more than where I was, so at that point, you bet I was interested.
Well, that's about when?
That was in, let's see, 61, 2, 3, 4, that was in 65.
Went to work in June of 65 as the manager of the exchange store.
And I'll never forget, back in those days, Earl Rudder was personally involved in selection of almost anyone that had any position of any importance whatsoever on the campus.
And so before they made an offer to me, Tom Cherry was the vice president for business affairs at that time.
And he had pretty well made his mind up that I was the one that he wanted.
But he really didn't have the authority to make me the offer until President Rutter had blessed it.
So President Rutter asked me to come to his office.
Well, I went in, of course, halfway scared to death.
He was in the systems building.
And he invited me to sit down.
And he says, Cargill, what makes you think you can run that store?
That was his greeting.
And I expected maybe some small talk.
There was none.
What makes you think you can run that store?
And he just sat there and looked at me.
But I started talking about my degree from A&M and my experience with Sears.
And I happened to mention that I was from Eddie, Texas.
He lit up like a light bulb.
He said, did you ever know a young lady from Eddie named Mary Lee Osborne?
I said, yes, sir, I knew her.
She was my next-door neighbor.
Her father was the leader of our Sunday school department in our church.
Well, he used to date Mary Lee.
And back in the early, well, I'm not sure he dated her, but he knew her well back when he was just a young, young, young man.
And so he kind of warmed up a little bit, and we talked a little bit about my background.
And he said, well, he said, I think you ought to have a chance at that store.
Let's see what you can do with it.
And he hired me that day.
All right, as you recall that conversation, did he ask you any question which in hindsight was inappropriate or a waste of time?
At that time, I was already in the reserves, and I think I'd made first lieutenant at that time, and he was very interested in the fact that I was a commissioned officer.
That was a plus.
That was a plus, definitely.
I'm not sure that would be an inappropriate question nowadays or not, but that's the only thing that I recall that he expressed an interest in.
Was there any humor at all?
Not at that time, no, no.
That was my impression of him, too.
I went there.
In his office, it was business.
It was strictly business.
Some three years later, we had put together some charts showing the growth of the store, the growth of the profits, and what we had done and so forth.
And Howard Vestal was my immediate boss at that time.
He was director of what we later called Director of Business Services.
I think his title was Director of Auxiliary Enterprises, and he reported to Tom Cherry.
And I reported to Howard as the manager of the bookstore.
So Mr. Cherry and Howard invited President Rutter over to take a look at this little briefing we had put together.
And all the arrows pointed up.
We were making money and doing well.
And, of course, our profits at that time, and I think still to some extent, go toward student activities and what have you.
And so we were able to generate a lot of money for student activities.
And he was very complimentary and said, well, he said, I think three years ago when we talked in my office that I made the right choice.
So that was the only semi compliment that never did really have too much personal one on one with one other exception, which was I'll never forget.
You remember the Aggie Joke books when they first came out?
The phone rang one day.
My secretary said, Mr. Cargill, Mr. Cargill said, President Rudder's on the telephone.
I said, sure.
You know, they were always pulling.
I said, sure it is.
I picked up on that.
I said, hello.
You know, he said, this is Earl Rudder.
I knew right then that it was Earl Rudder.
It was not one of my buddies pulling the trick on me.
He said, uh...
i understand y'all got some aggie joke books for sale over there i said yes sir president rudder i said we got a bunch of them and they're selling like hot cakes that was a wrong answer and he let out a few expertise and he says if you don't have those books off of sale before quitting time today i'm gonna fire your ass and he said do i make myself clear and he said if i ever catch another one in there i'm gonna fire you
I said, yes, sir, I understand completely.
And to this day, we've never sold another Aggie joke book.
Did he ever, as far as you're aware, directly to you or to someone, through someone else, give any other directions of what the bookstore ought to sell or not sell?
I can't answer that question completely, but I can tell you what I think.
For years...
Before I ever got there, the bookstore sold sports clothes, blue jeans, slacks, and we sold sport coats.
Now, the kids never bought sport coats, but the faculty and staff did.
And we never asked for credentials, so I'm sure a lot of the townspeople bought sport coats.
And there were some competitors off campus, A.M.
Waldrop,
up at Northgate, for example, for one, and I don't know who else.
I think he had, of course, a store downtown.
Alistair Waldrop had a store downtown, too.
But I understand that someone complained to Bill Moore when he was senator that we had no business selling sport coats and sportswear that the students didn't wear anyway.
So as a result of that, and whether Bill Moore called
or whether he called Tom Cherry or whether he called Howard Vestal or whether somebody else called him.
But I got instructions down that it probably would be a good idea if we got out of the sport coat business, which we did.
But I don't know if he was ever involved in that or not, but I suspect that he might have been.
All right, go the other way.
Are there any things that you from anywhere were led to believe that the store ought to start selling?
No, no, I don't recall anything because we were, we would carry a lot of things
that were non-profitable because they were convenience items and because we were asked to by various professors on the campus.
Architecture sticks in my mind, for example, they used a lot of weird kinds of graph paper and maybe some particular types of colors of inks and so forth that no one else, none of the off-campus stores would carry because they wouldn't sell one bottle every three or four years, but we carried them because we were asked to.
Pascal, I'm sorry, I've got to go to the restroom again here.
Once I start drinking carbonated drinks, it's... When you took over the bookstore, what was the... In what condition was it?
Was it a...
Was it doing well, or did you have some repair work to do?
Some of each.
It was well run.
Doc Birdwell did a good job, but his resources were very limited.
Auxiliary enterprises are required to make their own way.
We got absolutely no tax money, no subsidies.
In fact, we were expected to generate a profit, not cost money.
As I recall, the volume, the year that I went in was $640,000 for the first year.
They do 10, 12, 15 million a year now.
I'd say when I left some eight years later to take my next promotion, as I recall, we were doing around $2 or $3 million a year at that time.
Of course, a lot of that was caused by the growth of the university.
And so just what portion was caused by good management and what portion was caused by increased enrollment, we'll really never know.
And the primary competitor was, or one of the competitors, Mr. Lupo.
Lupo.
Then later on, John Rainey put in a bookstore.
But at the time I went in, there were really two, Lupo and Herb Shaffer, which now is a university bookstore at the Northgate, owned by Martha Kemp, Martha and Ernie Kemp.
Was Old Army Lou a fair competitor?
He was, and a good friend.
We used to...
get together.
All of the managers, the owners of the stores and me and some of my staff would get together maybe once a month and have a meal together.
And it was no animosity and just good heads up business.
We would always furnish them the book list free of charge so that they would have an equal shot at getting the books on the shelf in a timely manner.
I've been told that that was not always the case.
But when we went in, we felt that that was the fair way to do it.
And the students benefited from it, of course.
All right, during those years, describe
the management style of Howard Vestal and Vice President Cherry?
Two of the finest men you'll ever meet.
Tom Cherry's philosophy was to hire people, good people, and then give them the resources to do with and then stay out of their way.
Howard's method was somewhat similar to that, but he was a little bit more hands-on than Tom was.
Uh, Howard,
like frequent reports, was very astute on what should happen percentage-wise to sales, to expenses, to what have you, much more so than Mr. Cherry was.
They just had different management styles, but Howard was much more hands-on.
I felt, you know, keeping much closer tabs on what I did than Mr. Cherry did.
Of course, Mr. Cherry was the next level up, and that would be to be expected.
And I'm assuming because of his background and your Air Force Reserve, you and Howard Vestal had a good deal in common in terms of experience.
Had an excellent, excellent relationship.
In fact, when Howard came as Director of Auxiliary Enterprises, I had been the store manager for a period of several months.
Mr. Cherry had tried one or two other guys as director of auxiliary services and they did not meet his satisfaction so he let them go almost before they got in the door good.
In those days did any faculty group or dean or individual faculty member come over and try to decide something about the bookstore?
Yes, but in a positive way.
We had what we call the Exchange Store Advisory Committee.
There was an English professor named Sid Cox.
Sid Cox was the chairman of the Exchange Store Advisory Committee, and he felt about the bookstore the way Wayne Stark felt about the MSC.
That was his bookstore.
And he never interfered, but he spent a lot of time with us.
He'd come over and drink coffee with us.
The main job of the
Exchange Store Advisory Committee was to distribute the profits that the store made.
And in that role, he had a great deal of influence.
I have no idea what happened, but for some reason, and I honestly do not remember who made the appointments to that committee, but he was not reappointed to the committee.
And it hurt his feelings.
Sid was a fairly wealthy man.
He used to buy rent houses, and high-quality rent houses.
He had over 30 houses at one time.
And he told me that he had in his will that he had left all other than what his wife needed, that he had left no children.
Well, I think he had one.
I'm not sure if they had children or not.
But he had left enough money in his will to pay for the new bookstore in the MSC.
And when he got, when he was not reappointed, he changed his will and left A&M out of his will.
It hurt his feelings so bad, so badly.
As bookstore manager, what were the biggest frustrations and the biggest enjoyments for you?
It was almost like being in business for myself.
It was almost a line of staff organization.
I was the manager, and then I had an assistant manager who had been there for a long time.
I had a book department manager, and I had a clothing department manager, and I had a supplies department manager.
and then they had people underneath them.
So it was a line of staff organization, very similar to a military setup.
But it was that way when I went in, so I didn't organize it that way.
But I enjoy that type of an organization where you've got definite lines of responsibility so that if something goes right or something goes wrong, you can really go to the next guy down and find out what's wrong and then fix it.
I never have been too much on committee managements and what have you.
An organized way to postpone a decision as a committee.
But I enjoyed that very much.
Not a whole lot of frustration other than the fact that we had to be completely self-sufficient and some of those years we would just barely break even.
And other years we'd make some nice profit.
What were the biggest headaches?
Headaches, of course, always would be school opening, trying to get the textbooks on the shelf.
Getting book lists in from department heads was like pulling teeth.
And, of course, their excuse would be, well, the people in the department have not told me what they want to use, and I can't give you the list until I find out from them.
And the lead time when getting the books from the publisher would be long.
Or they've come out with a new edition.
and uh maybe the prof might not be aware of the fact that there's a new edition and he'd specify an old edition or you know just a lot of little things but nearly all of our real headaches revolved around textbooks which departments were the most and the least cooperative in supplying y'all with whatever you needed i really honestly don't recall i don't recall no i think it was pretty well widespread throughout the university it's
And you served in that role about five years.
About eight years.
Eight years.
Yes.
So almost all of Mr. Rutter's time as president.
Did you have any other interaction with him that we ought to include?
Not on a personal basis other than those that I mentioned.
My interview when I was hired and then the time he came over for our briefing on the status of the exchange store.
When Earl was at Tarleton,
he and Doc Burgle became friends.
Burgle was the manager of that bookstore there.
So when Earl came to A&M, he brought Doc in as the manager of the exchange store at the first opportunity he had.
I'm sure he didn't, I don't think he fired anyone to give him the job, but the job was open and so he brought Doc down.
You mentioned one ago the memorial service.
Yes.
Were you aware of his
decline in health soon before his death?
No.
I wasn't either.
I think it was a complete surprise to me.
Are you aware of how old he was?
59, wasn't he?
One month short of his 60th birthday.
Yes.
Therefore did not qualify for Veterans Benefit.
And you know, they've changed that now.
Once you reach a vesting period, and I've forgotten just what it is, I think it's, I want to say 55, but I'm not sure.
But there's a period from when you retire from the reserves and when you can start drawing your benefits.
But once you reach that, had you lived, you would have qualified, then your widow can receive the benefits.
And I don't know, obviously they probably didn't make that retroactive, so Margaret probably never really received any benefits.
I think that's correct, because as I understand, Mr. Teague, given all the influence he had,
tried to get an exception made and could not.
Well, if he couldn't do it, no one could at that time.
So you're appointed next.
What's the next task?
Okay, the next task was when the University Center Complex opened up.
I was appointed as director of the University Center Complex, which was a collective name for the MSC, Rudder Tower, and the Theater Complex.
Those three collectively were called the University Center.
But you did not have
responsibility for the bookstore anymore well when we when the bookstore first opened in the new location where it is now i was still the manager of the bookstore for approximately four months and then uh howard vestal and tom cherry appointed me as director of the entire operation well let me let me include the bookstore it included the bookstore right now it
Actually, the decision was made before I moved to the new building.
I knew when I moved in that as soon as everything was complete.
Now, we moved into the bookstore
the theater center and part of Rudder Tower was still under construction.
So it was understood that I was going to be in charge of the whole thing, but the whole thing was not ready for occupancy at that time.
So I was still the manager of the bookstore for a short period of time.
But then I was director of the University Center Complex for approximately two years.
And that's when this interaction with Wayne Stark came up that I mentioned to you that he was really
really distressed the fact that he was no longer in charge of the facilities themselves.
But we had such a close working relationship that he accepted that and there was not really a problem.
And were both, Mr. Cherry was still active or had he retired by then?
No, he was still the vice president for business affairs and Howard Vestal was the director of auxiliary enterprises.
And then I was there for two years and then Tom Cherry retired.
Howard Vestal moved into the Vice President for Business Affairs, and I moved into Howard's old job.
And we changed the name of it.
From that time, it was Director of Auxiliary Enterprises, but at the time I moved into it, we changed it to Director of Business Services.
And that included what?
And that included everything I had, which is the University Center Complex, food services, the airport, the golf course, the dormitories, shuttle bus operation, physical plant,
No, it didn't.
It didn't include the physical plant.
I'm sorry, that's later on.
That's basically it.
Do you remember when you took that responsibility, anything about the dimensions in terms of number of employees and total dollars involved and so forth?
I had about, at that point, I had about 1,500 employees
Most of them in food services.
Food services was a big, was a big.
Fred Dollar had a tremendous operation, and he reported to me at that point.
Now, I take it back.
We had over 2,000 in the organization at that time.
Remember what the budget was?
Have no idea.
It was broken down incrementally.
I know that the physical plant, I'm getting my jobs mixed up because when I was vice president for operations, the physical plant reported to me.
But as director of business services, the job I had previous to that, he still reported directly to Howard.
In either of those jobs, which of those was not self-sustaining in terms of income?
Okay, when I was director of business services, those were still all auxiliary enterprises.
We didn't get a penny of money anywhere.
We had to generate it all, from dormitories fees, or student service fees, or room and board fees, and of course the bookstore, all those had to be self-sustaining.
Which of those...
Did each of them separately stand alone?
Yes.
Okay.
Now, there was the business services account was 40110.
I don't know why I remember that number.
But as the profits were generated from these various activities, each fiscal year started off from ground zero with new appropriations.
But once the budget was appropriated, then we were expected to and usually have
money left at the end of the year that money was transferred into auxiliary enterprise auxiliary enterprises administration reserve which is account 41110 that was the best kept secret on the campus there were millions and millions of dollars in that account until this day i would say there are millions of dollars in that account it's where robert smith had a lot of power because he controlled that account and that could be used to bail out
almost anything on the campus.
Pretty close.
Legally?
Legally.
It was what we call local funds as opposed to appropriated funds.
And the president and the vice president for business affairs had great discretion on what to use that money for.
Describe working for Vice President Vestal.
was a real experience.
I consider Howard to be the reason for every promotion I had since the day I met him because every time he'd get a promotion, I'd take his old job.
And right on up, you know, after I was director of business services, when he went in as vice president, then he created a position a couple years later, about a year and a half later, of associate vice president for business affairs and moved me into that position.
And then when he retired, I moved in and when Frank Vanderbilt was there, then I moved in to the Vice President's position and the name was changed from Vice President for Business Affairs to Vice President for Operations.
Now that was the point, up until that time, the fiscal office was under the Vice President for Business Affairs.
And Frank and Art Blair and I sat down and we talked about the position.
And we all agreed that there might be some merit into splitting that up and letting the Vice President for Fiscal Affairs be a direct reporting agency to the President.
And that's when Eddie Joe Davis came in.
Frank sent me to Dallas to talk.
I met Eddie Joe at Love Field at the airport.
and had the authority from Frank to make him an offer to come down and be the Vice President for Fiscal Affairs.
Of course, he was the Vice President for Fiscal Affairs for Frank at North Texas, so Frank, it was a known quantity that Frank was getting.
And so I talked with Eddie Joe, and he said, well, he said, you know, I'd really love to come back to A&M.
Having been a cadet colonel of the Corps, he had some deep, deep roots at A&M.
And so to make a long story short, he accepted the job.
But when he came down, that
that separated that tremendous power that Tom Cherry had and that Vice President Vestal had.
And there was never a bobble of any controversy or anything during the time they had all that power.
But by separating those two positions, it diluted the power of that position because it separated the fiscal office from the rest of the activity.
Theoretically, when they were combined, that vice president had the authority to make a request from one side and approve it from the other side.
In other words, he would, you know, total authority.
But by separating them, if I needed something, then Eddie Joe was a balance.
to say, you know, we can both go to the president and I can say, well, I need this.
And Eddie Joe says, well, you know, if we do that, these are going to be the ramifications.
Otherwise, the president would never know that there was a problem because I'd make the decision because I had both sets of cards in my hands.
Well, then when Eddie Joe moved on to the systems building, then Robert Smith inherited that position.
Let me back up now.
Okay.
I want to make sure I'm telling this right.
Okay, my mind's clear now.
When I was there, when Eddie Joe was there, we were both vice presidents, both reporting to Frank.
When I retired, they rolled those positions back into one position under Eddie Joe, just the way it was when Tom Cherry and Howard Vestal were there.
They consolidated those all back under Eddie Joe.
Then when he left, Robert Smith came in and took the position while they were still all consolidated.
Then when Robert left, they split them back apart again, which is what they are now, which is what I think they should be.
You think that's the better arrangement?
No question in my mind.
There's too much chance for, that's too much power for one person to have.
Should they both be of equal status and both report to the president?
I think so, yes.
I think so.
All right, let's go back then in years.
Then you get up there at the top level at about the time Dr. Williams arrives?
Calhoun, the chief academic officer?
No, I was director of business services at that time.
Now wait a minute.
This is 19, Williams gets here November 1, 1970.